So it seems
there are few people
in the session, but
more are joining, so let's
start. Before I start, I just
wanted to let you know that I
mean I uploaded the lab assignment
for this week and as I promised, I
mean, I made part of the lab
actually optional. So if you
have time you can do that.
Otherwise it's just optional.
For instance, the lab report is
optional, and it's necessary if
you think that you have to
explain how to run the program
for the markers, because as I
said, I mean if the markers
cannot run the program, you lose
mark. Otherwise it is optional and
basically this week's lab
is about outputting the
Boolean function as a form of a
product of maxterms. So last
week was sum of products, this
week is going to be the product of
product of maxterms.
So that's just, uh, about the
lab and let's start.
So before I start again, uh,
is there any question about the
last week lectures or
previous lectures
or any concern about lab or
lecture assignments?
I'm happy to take your questions
or any issue.
Let me see the chat box.
So it seems there are no
questions. Again like
before, so in order to make
sure that everybody has the
focus to the slides, please
send me some feedback at
least.
Thank you, Wendy.
Gabe, thank you, thank you.
Nelson, Nicholas, Ethan.
Thank you so much, Justin.
Thank you Marco.
Thank you and let's
start. So we already.
Ah.
Uh, we already covered some
essential combinational logic
or essential logical circuits
for any computer systems, for
doing arithmetic and also data
transmission. Decoders and
encoders. Today, we are going
to continue with this category.
Data transmission, we will introduce
multiplexers and demultiplexers,
and then we move on to the
coders. The coders were introduced
in the book in the first chapter
and continued in this chapter
so, I promise to you that I
will cover fully it in this
chapter, so I'm going to finish
this chapter today for the coding
and all the logic circuits
required for coding, especially
for the binary codes.
So let's continue with
the multiplexer first.
So multiplexers are also
abbreviated as MUX or MPX. So
whenever you see MUX or MPX
is, it means that we are
Talking about the multiplexers
and, the use of the multiplexers
is this. As we saw in the
decoders, whenever a CPU
wants to process an information,
the CPU must first select the
memory location. The second step
is when selecting the memory
location, the CPU must let
the content of that memory
location be shared to the CPU in
order to be processed. So first
is selecting a memory location
and 2nd is transferring the
content of that memory location
to process. So
decoders were for the first one,
addressing or selecting just one
memory location out of many
memory locations. Multiplexers
are for the second step,
which is for
transferring the information.
So basically, uh, the connection
within the CPU and memory module
is called a motherboard. You can
see. Let me show you.
You can see in any board.
Let me show my camera
first.
So you can see that in any
computer system board, you have a
CPU. This is the CPU that I
mean, you can simply detach from
the main board.
So this is the CPU chip.
Uh, this is from Intel.
I believe. And also.
These are the slots for the
memory modules, so you can
install the memory modules here.
So I can have some memory
modules here. These are the
memory modules. So basically the
CPU actually is in communication
with the memory modules through
a board or main board.
But, uh, in abstract level,
we can call it a BUS or a shared
stream. So let me go back to the
slides.
So imagine this is the most
simplified version of the
that shared stream or shared
motherboard. All the
information is transmitted
through that to the CPU and back and
forth between the CPU and memory
module. So after selecting a
memory location by the
decoder, the content of that
memory location must be
transferred to CPU
To be processed. So one thing
is that we just let the first
memory location to have this
shared area to transfer the
information to this single
output.
If the CPU selects the second
memory location, then the second
memory location can share or
stream all their content to the
CPU. Third one, fourth, and
etc. So you can see that.
A MUX is a logic unit that
just switches between different
inputs to one single output.
The most simplest form of this
multiplexer has only two inputs,
so two inputs are going to be
transferred to one single
output. So two can be dervived
by two to the power of 1,
meaning that we need to have only one
bit to select among two inputs.
So let's see what multiplexer 2
by 1 looks like.
So this is the multiplexer two
by one. You have two inputs, I0
and I1. In order to select
within two inputs, we need 1 bit.
Uh, because with one, we can have two
combinations, zero or one. Based
on different combination of 1
bit, we can select one of the
inputs and attached that input to
the single output.
So this is the MUX 2 by 1. So
in order to design this logic
circuit, we have 1,2,3 inputs and
one single output. So if we form
the. Uh, so if S is 0,
the first input is going to be
selected, and if S is 1,
the second input is going to be
selected and attached to
the output, so again,
if S is zero, F is going to be I0
If S is 1,
F is going to be I1.
Whatever I1 is, either zero
or one. And here is the truth
table, so three input variables:
I0, I1 and switch input S, and
then a single output F. Whenever S
is 0, we don't care about the
input I1. We only care
about I0 and you can see
that whenever S is 0, whatever I0
is, F is exactly the same.
So 00 11 00 11.
However, if the switch actually
goes to the second value, I mean
the second option,
it selects the I1 instead of I0
we don't have to be worried
about the I0, only I1.
Whatever I1 is, F is going to
be that, so I1 is zero, F is 0. I1 is 00,
the other two options 11, so F is 11.
So you can see that by
selecting, we can attach the F to
be one of the inputs.
So this is the normal truth
table, so we can design F by
writing the sum of minterms.
So the minterm 1
is IO, I1 and S.
m3, m6, and m7.
And if we put it in, so minterm
one, minterm 3, minterm 6, and
minterm 7. In order to simplify
that, we can put it in the
Karnaugh map with three input
variables, I1, I0 and S.
And these are the shared
regions. One is this and one is
this. You can create this shared
region too but it
doesn't help with more
simplification. So as you can
see here, for the first region,
Whenever S is 0,
It doesn't matter what the value of
I1 is, only the value of I0,
so the first term, we have S
bar AND I0. And the second shared
region or adjusting cells here,
S is going to be one. This time the
value of I0 doesn't matter, I1
matters. So S, I1.
So again, if you look at closely
to the Boolean expression, based
on the value of S, F is going to be
equal to either I0 or I1.
So for F, if S is 0,
This term is going to be 0, so we can
simply remove that. This term
is going to be S bar, which means
one and then one AND by I0.
Whatever value of the IO goes to
F. The same is when the S is
is going to be one. If S is 1, this
term is going to be 0.
So we have to just think about
this and S is 1. One AND by I1
means I1, so F is going to be equal
to I1. And this
happens with all the other
larger multiplexers. So
basically F is
sum of minterms based on
the switch input.
And here is the design. I just
copy pasted from the book.
So two by one multiplexer, 01,
and this is the single output
and this is the Switch input.
Based on the search input,
either Y is equal to
I0 or equal to I1.
But one thing is that, let's look
closely to the logic circuit. We
can see that the multiplexer is
very similar to the form of SOP
So one level of AND and
final level of OR.
Yes, sum of product. So first
level is the AND, and second is
the OR or sum.
So basically the S is the main
important input because the S
activates only one of the ANDs
and the other AND is going to be
only 0. So for instance, if S is
0, this AND is going to be always 0
because zero AND with anything is
is going to be 0, so this OR is going to
depend on the other AND, which
is activated by this.
Zero comes here turns into one, so now this
AND must be wait for the I0.
Whatever the value of I0
goes to Y.
So just pay attention to the I
mean, this two level AND and OR.
This is the another way to write
the MUX truth table. So
basically if S is zero, F is going to
be I0.
S is 1, F is going to be I1, so this
is another way to write a
Boolean function. S bar I0,
whatever value of I0, or S I1.
This is because of the
property of the MUX. Because
the value of S depends
depends on I0 or I1.
So in order to build a larger
multiplexer, now we can have two
to the power of 2 by 1, meaning
that 4 by 1.
So now we have four inputs and
we want to select one out of
four inputs and connect to the
output. The single output. So in
order to select one input out
of four inputs, we need two
switch inputs. SO and S1
and based on different
combination of S0 and S1, we
can select four inputs and
connect them to the F. So if both are
00, the first input is going to be
attached to single output.
01. The second one.
10 I2 and
then 11 I3.
This is the convention, so based
on the binary number for the
switch input, we select uh, the
input based on the bus, so 11
selects I3. 10 selects
I2 and etc.
So in order to design this, we
can simply form a truth table
with 1 2 3 4 inputs. And +2 switch
inputs, so six inputs.
And one single output F. So
the truth table is going to have
how many rows? Anyone of you?
You can answer in the chat box.
So if you have 4 + 2 =
six input variables.
And one single output, how
many rows is the truth table
is going to have?
2, someone says true. Actually
we are is going to have two to the power
of 6 rows, so the two to the
power of 6 is
64 rows, I believe yes. So
that's a huge truth table.
But as we saw in the
truth table for the two by one
MUX, we can simply
rewrite a shorter form of the
truth table by this. You could
say that whenever the
Switch inputs, I mean S0
and S1 are both 0,
0 0, we don't care about the
value of the I1, I2, I3. We just
care about the value of I0
because in this case, I0 is going to
be in the output, so whatever the
value of I0, F is that. So if it
is zero, F is going to be 0. If it is
1, F is going to be 1.
The same for the other two
rows, or if the switch inputs
are 01. We only care about the
value of I1, and we don't
care about the value of I0.
So this is the simplified
version of the truth table and
you can see that the F is equal
to I1, 00 11.
And etc. So whenever the inputs
are one, only the I3 actually
goes to the outpu. 00 11, and
we don't care about the value of
the I0 I1 and I2.
And then in order to simplify
this, we have to put it in the
Karnaugh map with six variables,
1 2 3 4 5 6. And write the F as a
sum of minterms, so you
have to write which minterms is F
going to be 1. All those minterms
that have one in the I0 and
any value in the I1 I2 I3 is going to be
one in this row.
The same is here.
All the rows that have one in
the I1 and any other thing in
the I0 I2 I3 is going to be the minterm
for F because it makes it
one and etc. So if you put it in
the Karnaugh with six variables,
actually you don't have to
do that because I mean we can
simply see that F is 1 whenever
00 and I0 is 1, so
S0 bar, S1 bar, I0
or this is the other time.
S0, S1 bar, I1 and
ETC., and that's the beauty of the
Boolean function for the
multiplexers. And here is the
Uh, uh, sum of minterms after
minimization, so you can prove
that this is exactly the same as
the minimized form in the Karnaugh
with six variables, but it's
already shown that
whenever it's 00, I0 is attached, so
SO bar, S1 bar.
The only thing that happens is
going to be I0, so all the
other terms is going to be 0 if
the S0 and S1 is going to be 0.
All these terms is going to be 0. The
only terms that actually remains is
here. This one becomes 0 bar 1. 0 bar 1.
So it only depends on the I0.
The same with other combination
of the S1 and S0. For instance,
in this case, if S0 is zero
and S1 is going to be 1,
So this term is going to be 0.
This term is going to be 0. S0
because it's 0.
Yes, S0 is 0.
And all the terms is going to be 0.
This term also is going to be 0
because S0 is 0, so the only
remaining terms is this, 0 bar
makes it one.
S1 is 1, so this is going to be one
and the only thing that happens to be
in the AND is I2, so F is equal
to I2. If I2 is zero, F is 0.
F I2 is one and F is 1.
And let's design this.
So. For the MUX four by one, you
can see that again we have two
levels, one level AND, one final
level OR. And the switches
Only activates one AND and all
the other ANDs are always 0, so
if the S0 S1 is going to be for
instance 00. So 00, only this
becomes one. This becomes one, and
only activates this AND.
And all the three other ANDS
is going to be 0 always. So this OR
only depends on this AND and if I0
is 0,
This is going to be 0. If I0
is one, it is going to be 1.
And that's a nice logic circuit
for the MUX.
You can design MUX 8 by one.
For the 8 by 1, how many switch
inputs do you need?
Can anyone answer this?
Now we want to build a larger
MUX. I mean we want to
select within eight inputs
and attach one of them to the
single output. How many
switch inputs do we need?
If you have I0,
I1 until I7.
Yes, correct Justin says three inputs.
So because eight is 2 to the
power of three, so we need 3
switch inputs to select because
3 inputs has eight different
combinations and we can assign
each combination to one of the
inputs. In general, if you are
going to build a multiplexer 2
to the power of N by one, you
need N switch inputs.
So based on the value of SO up
until SN, you can select one of
the inputs from I0, I1
up until I 2 to the
power of N. Attach one
of them only at a time
to the single output.
One thing is that.
Indeed, if you compare the logic
circuit of the MUX with the
decoders. For the decoder, we
already knew that in the decoder,
you just transform a binary
number to a 1-hot vector.
And if you look at the logic
circuit for the decoders, the
1-hot vector haves
ANDs, and at each time, one of
the ANDs is going to be one, and all
the other ANDs are going to be 0.
This is for the decoder.
So you can see that it's a
very similar logic circuit
for the MUX, so for the MUX,
based on the switch inputs,
which are the binary inputs in
the decoders, you can activate
one of the ANDs.
And for the decoders, when
the AND is going to be activated, the
output is always one, but here
we just input the
I0 I1 I2 and I3 to the ANDs.
So this is the extra input to
the ANDs when we compare this
logic circuit with the decoders.
Also, the decoder doesn't have
any OR, so in the MUX, we have
final OR. So it gives you an
idea that it is possible to
redesign the MUX with decoders
plus an OR gate.
So you can think about this at
home. Uh, actually? In the book,
there is a way to build the MUX.
You can read about that, by reusing
the decoders. So if you are
going to build a MUX 4 by 1, it
is possible to reuse the decoder
2 by 4
Plus, an AND, an OR gate and
some additional things.
And another thing is that.
As I said, the logic circuit of
the MUX has two levels gates.
One level is the ANDs and one
final level OR. This is very
similar to the sum of products.
You remember for instance, in
the last week labs, you have to
output the Boolean function
based on the sum of minterms or
sum of  products. So the MUXs are
very similar to the sum of
products. So it gives us a hint
that we can
redesign any Boolean function
based on the sum of products
by reusing the MUX. We did that
with the decoders, we really
saw that with the decoders, we
can redesign the any Boolean
function. Now we want to see that,
How can we do that with MUX?
So with multiplexers, we can
reduce on any Boolean functions
based on the SOP.
I'm not talking about this, but
you can think about this. Is it
possible to, whether it is
possible to use multiplexer for
product of sums or not?
This is possible, but you have
to redesign a little bit, using
demultiplexers. But today
I'm going to talk about the
sum of products.
You can read about this in the
book. There's another type of
multiplexers built with the
NAND gates. With that you can use
the product of sum.
But let's see how can we use
the MUX for a Boolean function
based on the sum of products.
Imagine you go to the market and
buy a MUX 8 by 1.
And now, uh, you're asked to
write a Boolean function
based on the three input
variables XY&Z and this
Boolean function F is a Sigma. It
means sum of these minterms,
for instance with m0, m1, m4, etc.
So the thing is.
You can simply attach the
input binary variables for
the Boolean function to the
switch input of the MUX.
And the thing is, when you do
that based on the binary number
in the binary input variables,
you select one of these inputs.
For instance, if F, the Boolean
function, is Sigma minterm one
and etc. So m1 is 001.
So if you attach this 001 to the
S0 S1 and S2, it selects I1.
So I1 is going
to be attached to F.
Because F is the Sigma minterm
one. So it means that whenever
minterm one is 1, everything is 1. So
I1 is attached to F. So I1
is going to be one in order to
make F1. So basically for this
instance, 001, you have to input
one into I1.
And for all other minterms, you
have to check what.
is going to be the input of each
input in the MUX.
So let's this is the general
idea, so let's practice.
Imagine we're going to
redesign the full adder by MUX.
We already built the full adder
by only one half adder. Also we build
the full adder by reusing two
half adders. Also, we redesign
full adders last lecture by
using the decoders. Now we're
going to build the full adder
by using MUX. So in the full
adder, we have this sum output,
which is the Sigma minterms 1,2,4,7.
Basically the exclusive
OR of the X, Y and the carry
from the previous step.
And the carry, the final carry
from the full adder is a Sigma
minterms 3,5,6,7, which is basically
based on this truth table. You
can see that.
This is the final carry. The
final carry is X&Y.
And also carry from the
previous step, so X&Y.
And carry from the previous step
and Y carry from the previous
step  and X. So we already saw
this if you put the carry,
Sigma minterms 3, 5, 6, 7 in the Karnaugh map
with three variables, we can
simplify that. But I mean
without simplification it's
Sigma minterms
three, five, six, and seven.
The same for the sum output. But
we already knew that.
Now we want to use MUX.
First, let's see what
happens with the S.
For the S, we have
Sigma Minterms 1,2,4,7 so.
Here.
The first one is the minterm one.
Meaning that in the input, we
is going to have X = 1, Y = 0 and carry
from previous step = 0, so 001. 001,
if we connect to switch inputs,
makes the I1
Attached to the output. The
output,we can
rename F right now to S,
the final sum. So if you have
minterm one in the input, S is going to
be one, so in the MUX, I1
is attached to S, and I1
must be one, so we can simply
input one into the I1.
The next one is.
Ah.
Sorry I didn't get
your question. I'll be
back with your question.
Let's finish this. The
second minterm, the second minterm
is 2.
Minterm 2, minterm two is 010. If
you attach this to the switch
input of the MUX, it selects I2.
We know that sigma minterm
2, meaning that the minterm
2 makes S1. So if you attach
010 to the MUX, it selects
I2 to the S and I2 must be
one in order to make S1.
The third minterm is minterm four
m4 is 100. When you
attach this to the switch input
of the MUX, it selects I4.
You see that minterm four selects
I4 in the MUX.
And I4 is now attached to the
S. And because m4 is in this
Boolean function, it makes S = 1. I4
must be an input with one.
The last one is m7, so you can
assume that you can
anticipate that m7 attached to
switch input of MUX selects I7
and because m7 makes S = 1, I7
must be an input with one.
So in other words, whenever we
have m1, m2, m4, m7 in the switch
input. The inputs
Must be
Enabled, or inputted by 1.
Otherwise, for all the other
minterms, they must be 0 because
in other old minterms
for instance, minterm zero, minterm three
and etc., S is 0. So you have to
input the other inputs in the
MUX with zero.
So this is the Boolean
function S by reusing the MUX
8 by 1.
For the carry, the same. For the
carry, minterm three
makes this C = 1. Minterm three in
the inputs of the MUX
selects I3. So one to the
I3. Minterm 5 select I5.
1 to the I5.
Minterm 6 selects I6, 1 to the I6.
Minterm 7 selects I7, one to the
I7, and in all other inputs of
the MUX, we input 0 because
these minterms makes C = zero, and
then we don't have those
minterms in the C.
So now I can take your questions
so Mingxi says.
01101001. I keep seeing XOR here,
is x xor y xor z.
I'm not sure I understand
your question Mingxi.
What do you mean by XOR?
You're talking
about this.
Here.
OK, so we said that
the sum in the full
adder is the exclusive or of
all the three inputs.
So.
We said that.
So for instance here, the
exclusive or of these three,
exclusive or, this is 1 and then
one yes. 010 exclusive or
one.
Exclusive or 1, 1 is going to be
000 exclusive or 0.
And.
Ah, so again, true, actually
the sum is exclusive or XY and
carry from previous step.
So what's the question?
Oh.
Great yes yeah, actually that's
the beauty of this sum because
in the half adder, what about m7?
Uh. Again, m7, the exclusive
or of XY, 11 becomes zero and then
the exclusive of 01 becomes one.
So the same for the m7.
So we already designed this full
adder two lectures ago,
so you can have a look at the
design, but please practice on
that because you have to
remember. They half adder is
exclusive of XY, full adder
is exclusive of XY and the carry
previous step. Also, these
are the most famous
logic circuits in any computer
system, so half adders, full
adders. In the lecture
assignment for previous week,
I put a question about
subtractor. So you have half
subtractor, full subtractor, so
these are the famous logic
circuits, so you have to kind
of memorize them.
So, so you saw that we can reuse
the MUX for any Boolean
functions. So the next is.
In the book, in this
page 161, it proposes a better
approach to reuse a smaller size
MUX for the same Boolean
function. So basically what we
did here is that whenever we
have a Boolean function with
three inputs, we need a 2 to the
power of 3 by 1 MUX.
If the Boolean function has four
input variables, we need a 2 to
the power of 4 by 1, meaning
that 16 by 1 MUX.
So depending on the number
of input variables for the
Boolean function, we have to
select the specific MUX.
But in the book, it says that
There is a way to
Reuse a smaller size MUX for
a Boolean function with larger
size. For instance, if you have
a Boolean function with three
input variables, we can reuse
the MUX with 4 by 1, meaning
just two input switchs.
If you are given a Boolean
function with four variables, we
can reuse the MUX.
8 by 1, two to the power of 3, for
three switch inputs. So it means
that one bit less than the
number of input variables for
the Boolean function.
So let's see how it is possible.
I just wanted to quickly explain
that you can fully read about
that in the book.
So basically again, if you're
going to redesign the full adder
by MUX. For the full adder, we
have three input variables: X, Y,
and carry from previous system.
We saw that we can reuse the 8
by 1 MUX, but now we want to
see can we reuse a smaller
size MUX 4 by 1?
The answer is yes, and this is
the approach. You simply detach
the highest significant bits
And put it in the input. I'll
explain how, and then all the
other lowest significant bits
goes to the switch inputs.
So here we have three input
variables. The highest
significant bit is the carry
from previous step. So you just
detach it and put it in the
input and all other lower
significant bits goes to the
switch input X and Y.
And now let's see how can we
input, so we have two switch
inputs, so we can
select four inputs.
So let's see how can we input
the carry from the previous step to
the input of these four by one
MUX in order to build the
Boolean function for S.
The first one. So minterm one
must make S = 1. Minterm one is
001. So zero goes to the
inputs here, and 01 goes to
switch inputs. 01 selects the
I1. And I1 now is attached
to the S and S must be one.
Carry from the previous step is 0, so
if I put a not on top of that, it
means that carry bar
makes the S = 1. Carry is 0, not
makes it one. So I1 becomes
one and S is 1.
Let's move on to the next
minterm. The second
minterm, minterm 2. Minterm 2 is
01000 goes to the input and 1
zero goes to switch inputs.
10 Selects I2 in the four by one
MUX I do now is attached to
the S, S must be one for the
minterm. 2 So I 2 must be one.
carry from previous step is 0, so I
applied and not on top of that
in order to make it 1.
Now S is 1.
The next min term is 4.
Four is 1001 goes the input, 00
goes to the switch input, 00 in
the MUX selects I0 and now I
zero attached to the S as must
be one, because minterm four
makes S1 an now already carry
from previous step is one. I
just simply input the carry
from previous step.
This is 1, so one goes to the
S And the last minterm is 7.
111 The the higher significantly
goes to the input. This goes to
switch inputs. 11 Select I3 and
I3 is in now attached to S and
M7 makes S1. So I3 Must
be one in order to make S one
in the MUX.
We already knew that the
California previous step is 1,
so we just attach carry from
previous step to the I3.
So based on the value of
carry from previous step,
either the normal form or the
compliment form, we can write
the Boolean function for S by
a smaller size multiplexer.
The same is for the uh, for the
final carrying the full adder.
The final carry in the full
adder is minterm 3567.
And if you put its practice for
the each mintern, so minterm three
is. 011
So zero goes to the input, 11
goes here, 11 Selects I3.
Now I 3 attached to the
carry, so it must be one I3
carry from previous step zero
followed by the not becomes one.
Why we have this?
terrm to the I3 Because another
min term between 7, minterm.
7 is 111 so one one in the
switch input selects I3 and this
time the Carry from previous
step is 1.
So. carry from previous step is One in
minterm three carry bar
in minterm 7 Carry so either
this or this so this is the
complement postulate anything
or with the complement format
itself makes it one. So I
three is always one.
For the final carry
off the full adder.
As you can see here in all these
minterms we never select I0
because for the I0 you have
to put 00 in the X&Y.
So either 100, either 000, so
none of minterms. None of these
minterms are in the in this sum
of minterms. So we don't have
minterm zero. We don't have
minterm four, so I0 never
selected for this MUX, so it's
always zero. You can check for
the other two inputs, so this
way you can read.
You can use the smaller size
MUX for any Boolean functions,
so this is the approach.
Detach the highest significant
bits and put it in the input
side of the MUX on all the
others. Lower significant bit
goes to the switch inputs and
then you have to 1st you have to
step by step. Check the minterms
in order to see what value of
the high significantly goes to
the input side of the MUX.
Uh. And here is the final
design. So based on the XY and
Carry from previous step, one
MUX for the S and one MUX for
C and these matches are 4 by
1. Is love just having?
2 to the Power 3 eight by one
you have 4 by 1.
There is another way to as I
said, to design the multiplexers
with decoders. This is with
additional gate called Three
State gate. I leave it for you to
read about this in the book, so
I leave some assignment for you.
I mean, this is part of this
course, so please read the book
and explore what is the three
state gate and how can we use
the three state gate plus
decoders to build multiplexers.
And the next topic is D-
multiplexer. So before I
start this topic, I'm happy
to take your questions.
About multiplexers.
So multiplexers are for
selecting one input, attaching
it to one single output.
Basically the main logic unit
for select transferring
information from memory to the
CPU and But you can reuse it
for designing any Boolean
function. boolean function
with N input variables. Can
we redesigned by the MUX 2 to
the power of n by one also
based on the optimizer
in the book you can
reuse is smaller size
multiplexer 2 to the power of
N - 1 by 1 in order to write
a Boolean function for with
n input variables.
No questions aa.
So the next topic is
demultiplexer. We already
introduced decoder and then we
said that there is a reverse
logic called encoder for the
MUX. The same. We introduced
multiplexers selecting one input
and attaching to the output.
Demultiplexer is the reverse
logic. Attaching one single
input to one of the single
outputs. And here is the logic.
So this is the MUX 4 by 1 for
input based on the switch input
will select one of them.
De-MUX is the reverse logic,
so based on the switch input we
attach the single input only one
input. 2 one of the four output
1 by 4.
And you already, if you master
how to design the multiplexer,
De-MUX. So this is the truth
table. If the S 0 and S1 is 00.
F is going to be attached to the O0 to
output 0. So whatever the value
of F is.
The value of output 0 is going to be
that so 0011.
All the other outputs
is going to be 0.
If the switch goes to the second
combination 01. Whatever value
of F is goes to the O one.
And all the other
outputs is going to be 0.
10 O2 And all
the other outputs is going to be 0.
And. The last combination 11
selects all three.
So whatever, whatever the
value of F goes, the O
three and all the other
outputs kind of be 0.
And here is the shorter format,
the truth table. So we can
simply just. Merge these two
rows. An say that whenever
S 0 and S1 is 11 O3 is
equal to F.
So 0000 is F and all the other
output 0 01 O one is F or
the other output 0 and up until
here 11 O3 is going to be F.
And all the other outputs is going to
be 0. And we have 4 output
variables of O0 O1 O2 O3 for each
one we have to write the Boolean
function based on the sum
minterms or product of Maxterms.
So we can simply see that for
O zero. Is O zero
is always equal to?
S0 is going to be 0 bar S1.
Gonna be 0 bar so
0 bar 1 010 bar 11 and 1
so depends only on F.
The same for the other outputs.
And here is the De-MUX design,
so you see that the De-MUX
design is very similar to the
multiplexer. The only thing is
that it doesn't have the.
Final or it only has the first
level ands. Based on this, which
inputs one of the ands activated
on all the other are always with zero.
And the single inputs.
Goes to all the ands.
For the deal for the MUX,
we have four input goes
to the ands, one single
output. But here for the D
MUX we have one single
input attached to all ands.
And we don't have the final or.
The output of the ands is going to be
the output of the MUX.
This is very similar to
the decoder.
And in fact, if you go to the
market whenever you ask to buy
the demultiplexer, they will
sell you decoder with enable
input and. If you say that no, I
want Demultiplexer and
they would say that
demultiplexer is exactly the
same as decoder. So, and how
come I leave it for you to think
about that? How a decoder with
enable input and this is
crucial. Decoder with enable
input, because without enabling
input is not equal. It decoders
with enable input is exactly the
same as the demultiplexers.
So think about that how it is
possible. So just look at this
design and compare this design
with the decoder.
A decoder for.
2 by 4.
This is the decoder here through
by 4 outputs, so this is the
decoder 2 by 4, but it has
enabled input, so if you.
Rotate. The logic Circuit of the
decoder with enable input. It
becoms De-MUX. It's interesting,
think about that.
And now we are going to move
on to the last category of
the logic circuits or
combination logic, which
is about coding.
So any questions so far?
This last category is in a
little bit different from the
previous two categories or
because I'm going to cover all
the material in the first
chapter. So.
It's a completly fresh.
Uh, just to make sure that
everyone has attention to the
lecture and. Please send
me some feedback.
Thank you .
Thank you. So it means
OK, everyone has the attention.
Thank you everyone.
Nice, so that's one thing. The
last category coders.
So.
The concept of coding actually
is a well established in the
topic called cryptography. So
actually there is an optional
course in computer science
called cryptography which
basically discuss all this thing
about decoding. But here we just
wanted to simply touch on the
topic. Uh, the coding is
basically has. 1 first
step, encoding meaning that
assigning Any symbol B to
any other symbol A so it's
a mapping. So from one
source domain to another
target domain we just
created mapping. So if you
go from the source domain
here pick an elements A and then
assign is another another
element from the target
domain B. We call this
encoding so a encodes to B.
If you go there to the reverse,
we if we are given the B from
the target domain and we are
asked what was the element from
the source domain.
In order to figure out the
reverse process is called
decoding, so this is the I
mean, two main step encoding
and decoding.
So whatever this encoding and
decoding happens between this
source domain. For instance, an
element of the source domain A and
element of the target domain B.
This is going to be happen with the
Convention, so this mapping.
This convention might be a math
algorithm. For instance, all the
conversion in the radix
numbering system were based on
the algorithm. For instance, if
you are given a decimal number
and you're asked to convert it
to the base two, you use an
algorithm you divide by two
multiple times and put the
remainder in the reverse order.
This is an algorithm.
Or if you are given a number in
base 16 and you're asked to put
it in the base eight. So
basically you have to bring the
base 16 to base 10 and then
base 10 to the base eight.
This is an algorithm, so this
mapping is based on the math or
algorithm to do that.
Sometimes it's not based on
algorithm. There are no math
involved in the mapping. This is
just based on a look up table.
It says that whenever you see a
put P whenever you see C put
D. So this is a look up table.
We already saw such a thing in
base 64. The base 64 is one of
the bases, but the assignment
of. Each digits, each element of
the or each symbol of the base 64
to its decimal value was based
on the look up table.
For instance, the forward slash
was the last elements with the
value of 63.
So whenever you are asked to
figure out the value of each
symbol in base 64, you have to
ask for the look up table. What
what is the look up table to map
between the value and the symbol
in base 64? Sometimes it is
based on the engineering in the
practice will see today some of
them an other thing whatever the
mapping is, it must be a
convention that you always
follow that in order to map any
symbol from the source domain to
the any symbol to the target domain.
Sometimes the mappings are not
two ways, meaning that there is
a way for encoding, but there is
no way for decoding. It's called
one way coding.
You might probably heard about
the hashing codes.
Hashing code is a way of one way
coding. For instance, you login
into any online websites and you
create a password in those
websites. You know the  your
own password, but all the
website designers or developers
on the back. They shouldn't know
your password. Uh, otherwise
they may compromise your
password and user password for
some fraudulent activities.
So one thing happens is that
usually the websites all I mean.
Websites actually they make a.
They assign a code to your
password, so basically they
this code called hash code. So
they encode your password to
be. But whenever I look at to,
the B I cannot recover your
password. So one way. But there
is no decoding. So all the
people that look at your
hashcode of your password they
do cannot recover your password.
Ah, this is just an inch. I mean
just the concept one way, but
today we're going to talk about
two way codings based on look
up tables so we have a look up
table and. Uh, for instance in
base 64, this is the look up
table. So we say that what's the
value of A zero? What's the
value of B 1? Or whenever you see
that, what's the symbol for the
value of 18, it is S.
What's the value of 50? What
what's the value of digits 5 in
base 64 it is 57.
So this is as you can see, this
is a two way. Coding is on look
up table and there's no
algorithm for that. You can come
up with an algorithm could say
that for the capital letters 0
up until here to five, but.
Actually there is no. This is
the standard for this decoding.
So today we're talking about
some specific area of coding,
which is about assigning binary
codes 2 symbols.
So basically you can see that we
just assign a binary number or
binary code to a symbol or
thing. Oh correct, the MD5
is a hashing code, so one
way Nicholas, actually Nicholas
asked about the MD 5 is
one of the algorithms for hash.
So it's a one way.
Coding.
And this is a code for checking
the accuracy of an information
in transmission protocols.
Uh.
Yes, this is one way. Yeah,
and there are other, uh, one
way codes. That you can just
search about that, but it's not
about that. Just just. I mean
just wanted to show you any
hint. As I said, there's of
course and cryptography that in
that course they talk about and
in full. But just for your
information, MD5 is a
one way coding as far as I know.
Ah, so the first binary
code is called binary coded
decimal or BCD.
This is another name for that
1248 so 1248 code or BCD
code and let's see what it
does. Basically it assigns a
binary number.
To a decimal digits.
And here is the look up table.
SO for 0 in the assigns, 4 bit code.
00010 For the
digit one, it assigns 4 bit code
000 one and up until 9.
1001 So you could say
that so this is the binary
number? Uh, what's the
difference between binary code
and binary number? for digit from
zero to 9 binary number and
binary code in the BCD code is
exactly the same.
OK, however, if you go further,
for instance 10, Eleven, 12 up
until I mean greater numbers in
decimal system. The binary code
going is going to be different
from the binary number.
What is this for the 10?
It in the binary code or BCD
you have to put the code for
one. So what's the code for
one 4 bit code 0001?
Uh, what's the code 404 bit
code four zero 0000, This is the BCD
code for that. However, the
binary number for 10 is this.
So although from 0 to 9 BCD is
exactly to the the same as the
binary number, however, for
the 10,11 and greater than
nine, these two are different.
So basically for the BCD you
have two for each digit in the
decimal system you have to put
the four bit code for that.
And the BCD code is called 1248
and the reason is from zero to
9. It acts like the binary
number. So the first bit has the
value of 2 to the power of 0.
So one the second bit is going to have
the value of 2 to the power
of 1. 1.
Uh, which is the the two value
of two. The third bit has the
power of 2 to the power of 2
meaning that four and the 3rd and
the 4th bit from zero to four,0 to 3.
The fourth bit has a value of 2
to the power of three, which is
8. So from digits zero to 9.
It has a the value
1248.
That's why the the BCD is also
called 1248 code.
One more example is here for 20
you have to put the code for
20010 and the code for 0, and what
the binary # for 20 is this.
So this is another example,
imagine you are given 185 in
decimal system. And you're asked
to code or encode it to the BCD.
Also, you can encode it to the
binary system. So for the BCD
coding you have to put the four
bit code for each digit for the
10001 and then 81000 and then
five. 0101
However, for the encoding
to binary number.
You have to be. This is the
algorithm already in the first
chapter. You have too much. I
mean, repeatedly divide by two.
And then qoutient divided by
two quotient divide by two
and etc and put the remainder
in the reverse order.
And you can see that this number
in decimal system is encoding to
BCD by this and the binary
system by this.
This is an example to show
you that BCD is not
exactly the same as the
binary number by system.
So there are other binary codes
as well. For instance, this is
the table that includes a three
other binary codes.
1242 this code also again will
is going to explain it.
Accessed three and minus 1 minus
2 four 8.
So let's see what are
these codings?
This is called Aiken code,
where the four bit code has
these . The first bit
is going to have the value of 1,
the second bit 2, the third
bit 4 so far, the same as the
BCD, but the last bit instead
of having the value of eight,
it has the value of two.
So this is called aiken code
and we'll see why changing the
value of the last bit from eight
to two has a nice. I mean why we
do that? Why aiken do that?
This code actually proposed by
the Howard Aiken in I believe in
1970. And this code is still
using in the. I mean handheld
calculators. So the nice
property is that when you change
the highest value from eight or
two to the power of three to
two. It happens like this from
zero to four. Exactly the binary
number, so zero is 000, one is
0012, is 0010 and etc up until
4. Will you move to the five?
Five is the not of four.
So if you apply not operator
on each bit of the four, so
this zero becomes 1 1 becomes
0 0. This one, sorry, zero
becomes 1 0 becomes one.
And then if you go to the six,
six is the not of three.
Seven is the not off two, so you
don't have to memorize the
aiken code. You have to just
simply say that from zero to
four, exactly binary number.
From the five to the nine, is
the not off its complements. so 4
The nines complement of four is
fine. So you can simply for the
five, you could say that what is
the 9 complements of five is 4,
so whatever the code for for the
four is, we just simply applied
a not. Another example, for
instance 8. So if you want to
see what's the code for eight
in Aiken. So you could say
that what's in nine
compliments of eight, the nine
complement of eight is 1.
So the code for one is
000 1, so I applied not
on top of that becomes 1110 1110.
This is a nice property of the
Aiken code. It's kind of a
relationship between nines
complement in decimal system and
1's compliment or not operator
in binary system.
Again, as you can see here 5 not
of the four 6 not of three.
7 Not off give 2 And atc.
So again, if you're asked to
give the 185 in decimal system
an encoding to the aiken code.
Which is a weighted code 124.
The last bit has the value of
two. For the first.
bit you put the code I can
code for this one.
For the 2nd digit, you put
the aiken code for 8, but the
aiken code for 8 is the 9
complements of eight is 1, so
not on the 9's compliment.
For the five not on the nine
complements of five.
and This is the code for
one. This is the code for
four in the aiken and then
put the nots on top of that.
And this is the aiken code
for 185 in decimal system.
Any questions? So the
next code is the
excess 3 code
excess 3. as the name
says this is proposed
by stibitz it's I think
it's in 19.
I don't remember you can go to
the Wikipedia. I think it's
about 1930. or 40 he proposed
this coding. Uh, basically the
coding for each decimal digit
is. You have to just apply plus
three and then put the binary
code for that. So for the the
code for 0 is 0 + 3 is 3, so the
binary code for three.
That's why they call it
excess three.
The code for one is 1 + 3 four
binary number for 4.
For instance, for the Nine, 9 +
3 becomes 11, the binary # for 11.
So basically, the excess three
is the. The number the decimal
number +3 and then you apply the
binary number for that.
So for instance, for the 185,
our previous example for the
one you have to just add three
to each digit, so one plus
three, 8 + 3 and 5 + 3, and
then you just put the binary
number for each digit.
The first is the four, the 2nd
11, the third 8th, and then the
binary number for that. So for
is 0100. 11 is 1011
an 8 is 1000 binary number
for each digit. After
adding with three.
So there's another code.
This -1,- 2 4 8 meaning that
the first bit has the value of
minus one. The third bit, the
second bit has the value of
minus two. This is the coding
that has negative value. You
haven't seen this before, but
this is the first binary code,
not binary number. Again,
binary code binary code that has
negative value. The 1st and 2nd
as the negative value and 4th
and 5th 3rd and 4th has the four
and eight. Such as BCD.
Although the coding is different
from the aiken, for instance,
for the one aiken is here. But
for the this code the code is
0111, but it has the nice
property of the aiken, so five
is the not of four.
and etc.
So for this one I either you can
memorize the code or you are
given the look up table.
So for instance, if you are
asked to encode 185 to this
code. You have to just for each
digit. You could say that what's
the code for one?
Also.
What's the code for one is 0111?
So 0111 what's the code for 8?
Comes here 1000.
1000 and etc.
So I just wanted to skip sum
slide because you're running out
of time. Uh, read about the self
complementing a the.
aiken excess three, and this
minus 1 ,- 2, 4 8 has a
nice property called self
complementing. So I already said
that the 9's compliment of the
digit. Is equal to the one's
complement of the binary code.
You can practice on
this slide at home.
Uh, another code is Gray code
and the gray code basically
says that. Uh, as you can see,
the Gray code is for zero up
until 15, so this is the main
difference. Other binary codes
are up until 9, but the Gray
code actually consumes all the
combinations of four bits.
But the assignment is not based
on the binary # 0 goes to 0 1 goes
to one but three binary #3 goes
to decimal #2.
So the Gray code 4 two is 0011.
The binary #2 or the Gray
Code 0010 goes to three, so
this is different.
Uh, why the Gray code is
useful? You can read about that
in the book, but the property is
that if you are given a sequence
of numbers 01234, etc.
In the Gray code,
only one bit changes.
0 to 1, 1 to 3, 3 to 4, 4 to 5 and
etc.
And this is very
important because in
practice, for instance,
if you are going to move
from 7 to 8 in a binary
system, you have to
change 4 bits.
This is the seven. This is the
8th. So from 7 to 8 you have to
change 4 bits, but in the Gray
code from 7 to 8 you have to
simply just changed 1 bit.
So this is the code for seven.
And this is the code for eight
only. The first bit is
changing. Uh, this helps a lot
with reducing the noise when you
transfer information, and this
is the algorithm for that. So
you can read about how can we
produce the Gray code for any
decimal number, so please read
about these slides at home.
Uh, basically, uh. Algorithm
says that. For any Gray code
you have to 1st convert the
binary number. And then so for
20 you make it a binary.
First bit of the Gray code.
The same for the other bits.
You have to apply the
exclusive or based on the data
bits and the previous bit.
This way you generate the Gray code.
And if you compare the 20
Gray Code for 20 and 21, there's
only one bit changes.
Another code is the ASCII code.
Again, read about the ASCII code
at home, but what's the
relationship between the?
Codes and the combinational
logic. The thing is, for the
combinational logic we have to
design some logic units to
convert the code within each
other code conversion. So we
might for instance, if you are
given a code in BCD, we want to
design the logic circuit that
outputs the aiken code, or if
you are given the Aiken code you
want to output the BCD code. So
this is called code conversion.
Uh, for instance in the book
this example about converting
between BCD 2 excess 3 so
encoding to excess 3.
And basically you have four
inputs for the BCD in the
input and four output for
the excess 3.
And this is the full truth
table. So 000 in the BCD goes to
three. So this is the code for
three. Is the code for excess
3 for the 0?
This is a mapping for
one. It goes to 4 for 2. It
goes to five and etc.
These rows are those invalid
values for the BCD code, so for
all these inputs in the BCD you
can simply output. Put a don't care
conditions and then you can
write the. For each output, you
can write the sum of minterms
using the Karnaugh with four
variables, minimize it and reuse
the don't care conditions.
And then based on the Karnaugh
four condition, you can have a
code converter in the input.
You can have the BCD code in
the output. You can have
the excess 3 code.
You can have different encoders
from excess 3 to BCD, BCD to aiken
etc. So please practice at
home about this conversions.
And unfortunately, we don't have
enough time to cover the other
slides. But I'm going to finish
this chapter here. Next lecture.
We're going to start this
second, I mean the sequential
logic, the chapter 5th.
So you can cover all these
slides at home. Very simple if
you have questions please. I
mean, just come to the office
hour or send me some emails
about designing the combination
logic units for binary codes.
Once this is an example in the
lecture assignment so we can see
these slides in order to help
you how to design the.
Seven segment decoder's just
like this is the lecture
assignment. In the first chapter
in this slide, I just put some
explanation. How can you design
that? But this was just a
lecture assignments in the
Chapter 4.
And, uh.
There's some logic units in the
book in this page for arithmetic
under codes. For instance, doing
addition in the BCD or doing a
subtraction in BCD or excess 3.
So. Please read about these
in the book and also these
slides can help you to
understand the topics.
So thank you so much everyone,
and, uh. So next lecture
were is going to start the next
chapter sequential logic.
I'm also happy to take your
questions about all these
materials that you are going to
cover at home using these slides
and the book. Thank you,
have a great day.
You're
welcome.
You too have a great day.